---
layout: post
title: "Jokulhlaups"
date: 2020-07-22 12:00:00 -0600
---


Geological Setting
==================

Öræfajökull is an ice-capped stratovolcano which lies on the southeast
coast of Iceland on the southern tip of the Vatnajökull ice cap
(Stevenson et al., 2006). Although seismically quiet with
small-magnitude eruptions (Pagli et al., 2007), the volcano is
positioned within the moderately-active volcanic system joined with
Esjufjöll and Snæfell (Larsen et al., 2015). Although eruptions of
Öræfajökull have occurred during both glacials and interglacials
(Prestvik, 1980), it is the interaction between mafic and silicic magma
and ice that results in jökulhlaup events.

What are jökulhlaups?
=====================

Large scale glacial outburst floods are known as jökulhlaups.
Volcanically-induced jökulhlaups occur when subglacial volcanic activity
interacts with the overlying ice sheet, resulting in rapid and often
large-scale glacial meltwater drainage events. Literally, it translates
as ‘glacier burst’ in Icelandic; the country where these are events are
most common (Gudmundsson, 2015). These events are characterised by
high-discharge of meltwater with readily available sediment which are
deposited upon the lowlands.

The Öræfajökull jökulhlaups of 1362 & 1727
==========================================

The devastating 1362 eruption of Öræfajökull saw approximately 10km3 of
rhyolitic ash emitted from the volcano concentrated towards
east-south-east (Selbekk and Trønnes, 2007). Details of the 1362
eruption are provided in great detail by Thararinsson (1958) in the
novel *The Öræfajökull eruption of 1362*. The eruption was temporally
very short-lived, lasting some 1-2 days, however, it was one of the most
potent eruptions in Icelandic volcanic history with over 10km^3^ of
tephra discharged from the eruption. Its potency is highlighted by the
spatial extent of the eruption as tephra samples from the eruption have
been identified in ice cores from Greenland (72°35'N, 38°28'W; 3210m)
(Palais et al. 1991) as well as peat-bog cores from Scandinavian regions
(Pilcher et al. 2005). The eruption induced extensive jökulhlaups where
the discharge may have exceeded 1x105 m3/s (Thorarinsson, 1958) at its
peak; entraining and depositing sediment on the sandur. Lowland areas
were inundated with glacial meltwater and dead ice as farm
infrastructure was washed away. An account of the glacial flood is given
from Church annals and translated in Thorarinsson’s (1958, p. 26) paper,
which reads: *“At the same time there was a glacier burst from
Knappafellsjökull* \[now known as Öræfajökull\] *into the sea carrying
such quantities of rocks, gravel and mud as to form a sandur plain where
there had previously been thirty fathoms \[\~55 m\] of water.”* Due to
the sheer ferocity of the glacial outburst, conduits were not able to
adjust to the flow and basal sliding incurred as basal friction reduced.

Just how much sediment became deposited upon the lowland? Determining
the total sediment load of the jökulhlaup events is challenging due to
the spatial extent of sediment deposition and the complexities of
attributing sediment to each individual event. It is also challenging
due to the washing away and overriding of sediments by the later 1727
jökulhlaup. However, sedimentary deposits in the order of metres have
been identified some 4km west of Falljökull weighing over 500 tonnes
(Roberts and Gudmundsson, 2015). Deposits have also been classified in
the regions of Forarjökull, Grasjökull, and Miðjökull. Explorers
described the post 1727 jökulhlaup landscape as one ridden with debris
spanning some 3km wide and 13km long (Roberts and Gudmundsson, 2015).
Similarly, to 1362, deciphering the extent and quantity of the sediment
load is challenging as the region has been reworked by glacial advance
and retreat.

Although smaller than the 1362 eruption, the explosive benmoreitic 1727
Öræfajökull eruption emitted less than 0.2km³ of tephra (Thorarinsson,
1958). Similarly, to 1362, large masses of dead ice were carried through
the lowlands and destroyed pastures, while “white and porous pumice”
(Reverand E. Hálfdánarson, n.d.) covered south east Iceland. Jökulhlaups
from this eruption claimed the lives of three people and destroyed
entire villages, as stated in Thorarinsson’s (1958) account.

Opportunities for Lichenometric Analysis
========================================

The sediment-ridden jökulhlaup outbursts become deposited on the lowland
regions. The subsequent growth of lichens upon these deposits provides
opportunities for lichenometric dating. In other words, the age of the
deposits can be determined using the size of lichens. If the time
between the point of exposure of the deposit and when lichens begin
colonising is known, along with their species-specific growth
characteristics, it is possible to determine the age of the deposits
(Innes, 1985). For example, for the Öræfajökull eruptions of 1362 and
1727, populations of *‘Rhizocarpon geographicum’*, which have since
colonised the deposits, illuminate the age of the deposits and the
spatial extent of sediment transport. Interestingly, however, lichen
analyses of the Öræfajökull jökulhlaups show the 1362 deposits have been
overridden by the 1727 deposits. Without analysis of *R. geographicum*,
it may become challenging to decipher the sedimentary deposits of the
events which contrasted in magnitude.

Why is this of importance to glaciologists?
===========================================

Although glaciology is largely concerned with the study of ice, the
interaction between volcanoes and ice induces jökulhlaup events that
shape entire landscapes. It is also widely speculated that deglaciation
through climate change may increase the occurrence of jökulhlaup events
(Carrivick, 2011). This is due to more frequent volcanic eruptions
through the gradual release of stress upon volcanoes as the ice melts
(Carrivick, 2011). Such events have implications beyond the field of
study because they affect the way in which humans interact with the
environment; whether that be land-management practices or emergency
responses to outburst events.

About me
--------

![](/assets/images/thomas_blog_post/image1.jpeg)
Picture – Myself (right) and a friend on a recent research trip to
Iceland. The picture was taken at Heinabergsjökull, Iceland.

My name is Thomas and I have just finished my final year at the
University of Liverpool, England. Although my degree was in Geography,
elective modules allowed me to follow my glaciological interests and
pursue the field in great detail; plus I was able to visit some
extraordinary places! My passion for glaciology began after standing
face-to-face with a calving margin and realising the sheer power of
glaciers and their ability to calve, mould and shape landscapes of the
past, present and future. I hope you enjoyed reading my first blog
entry!

References
----------

Carrivick, J.L., (2011). Jökulhlaups: geological importance, deglacial
association and hazard management. *Geology Today* 27 (4), 133-140.

Gudmundsson, M.T., (2015). Hazards from lahars and Jökulhlaups. In The
Encyclopaedia of Volcanoes (pp. 971-984). Academic Press.

Innes, J.L., 1985. Lichenometry. *Progress in physical
geography*, *9*(2), pp.187-254.

Larsen, Gudrún, Magnús T. Gudmundsson, Kristín Vogfjörð, Evgenia
Ilyinskaya, Björn Oddsson, Emmanuel Pagneux. (2015). The Öræfajökull
volcanic system. In: Ilyinskaya, Larsen and Gudmundsson (eds.):
Catalogue of Icelandic Volcanoes. IMO, UI, CPD-NCIP.

Pagli, C., Sigmundsson, F., Lund, B., Sturkell, E., Geirsson, H.,
Einarsson, P., Árnadóttir, T. and Hreinsdóttir, S., (2007).
Glacio‐isostatic deformation around the Vatnajökull ice cap, Iceland,
induced by recent climate warming: GPS observations and finite element\
modeling. Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 112(B8).

Prestvik, T., (1980). Petrology of hybrid intermediate and silicic rocks
from Öræfajökull, southeast Iceland. Geologiska Föreningens i Stockholm
Förhandlingar 101, 299–307.

Roberts, M.J. and Gudmundsson, M.T., (2015). II. ÖRÆFAJÖKULL VOLCANO:
GEOLOGY AND HISTORICAL FLOODS. *Volcanogenic floods in Iceland*, p.17.

Selbekk, R.S. and Trønnes, R.G., (2007). The 1362 AD Öræfajökull
eruption, Iceland: Petrology and geochemistry of large-volume
homogeneous rhyolite. *Journal of Volcanology and Geothermal Research*,
*160*(1-2), pp.42-58.

Stevenson, J.A., McGarvie, D.W., Smellie, J.L. and Gilbert, J.S.,
(2006). Subglacial and ice-contact volcanism at the Öræfajökull
stratovolcano, Iceland. Bulletin of volcanology, 68(7-8), pp.737-752.

Þórarinsson, S., (1958). The Öræfajökull eruption of 1362.
