---
layout: post
title:  "Field Work Wars"
date:   2020-05-15 12:00:00 -0600
---

**Field Work Episode I: The Weather Strikes Back**

**Emma Pearce, PhD student at The University of Leeds**

![](/assets/images/pearce_blog_post/image1.jpeg)

For those of you who have seen Star Wars
Episode V, the Empire Strikes Back, you might recognise Hardagerjøkulen
(Hardanger) ice cap as the sixth planet in the remote solar system,
planet Hoth. You may also be familiar with Hardanger as part of the
region where trolls are confined to, as documented in 'The Troll
Hunter', an excellent, **factual,** documentary, and well worth a watch.
But when the ice cap isn't being overrun by AT-AT Walkers (see the photo
below if you're not too clued up on your Star Wars knowledge!) or
Trolls, Hardanger is home to the sixth-largest glacier in mainland
Norway which can be easily accessed by Finse railway station, where a
direct train runs from Bergen.

Other than Hardanger's historical importance in Star Wars, there are
other reasons that someone might choose to go there. For myself, those
reasons constituted a few things:

1\. I needed to test out a specific type of glacier geophysical seismic
acquisition as part of my PhD.

2\. Hardangerjøkulen's research station is supported by the EU Interact
funding scheme, meaning I could apply for funding to visit it.

3\. There is Firn on the ice cap (a feature that forms where snow becomes
denser and turns into ice) – the thing that I was wanting to study using
geophysics.

![](/assets/images/pearce_blog_post/image3.jpeg)

These three reasons combined meant not only was I able to apply for
funding to support my trip to Norway, (a BIG thank you to EU Interact)
it also meant, due to the accessibility of the glacier (in comparison to
perhaps… Antarctica), the logistics of testing a geophysical survey that
might not work were *relatively* easy.

The plan was to have two field seasons out in Norway, the first in 2018,
where I would scope out the best places on the ice cap for my research
where there was known firn coverage, and do some test surveys, and the
second a year later in 2019, where I would collect my final dataset.  

![](/assets/images/pearce_blog_post/image4.jpeg)

**Season 1, 2018:**

We packed up all our equipment in the UK and got it sent by cargo ferry
to Norway. Here we picked it up and then had to attempt to 'sneak' the
equipment onto the national Norwegian passenger
train.

![](/assets/images/pearce_blog_post/image5.jpeg)

Luckily for us, we had a few locals
travelling with us up to Finse, who was able to help us sweet talk the
conductors and fortunately, our five, 70kg boxes were allowed onto the
train, but they did get a few funny looks.

![](/assets/images/pearce_blog_post/image5.jpeg)

Once we arrived at Finse, transportation of
the equipment became a bit easier, we could just pop all the cargo
(including PhD students!) into the sledges, and skidoo ourselves around.
It was April when we visited Hardanger, the perfect time between the
winter's high winds and thick snow, and the springs higher temperatures
and snowmelt. The end of April provides a sweet spot, where there is
enough snow that you're still able to skidoo around the glacier, but the
weather is much calmer, allowing for the geophysical surveys to be
carried out in the optimum conditions.

Once we arrived at the station, we had two weeks to collect all the data
we hoped for (two seismic surveys and some GPR over the ice cap).

Of course, this all went perfectly to plan, we were done by the first
week, and then had a week to relax, enjoy the scenery, and get some
sledging in…. or.. not.

![](/assets/images/pearce_blog_post/image7.jpeg)

![](/assets/images/pearce_blog_post/image9.jpeg)

Things you quickly learn as a field
geophysicist are that fieldwork never quite goes to plan. Equipment
breaks, (thank you SD cards), you bring spares of everything except the
one thing you think won't break, (thank you ground penetrating radar),
and the weather is always worse than you had hoped for (it was both too
hot and too cold!).

Because of crevasses in the ice cap, we could only get to the top of it
on days where there was good visibility which was quite a holdback when
overcast is the assumed weather. Luckily, all we needed were 3 good days
out of 14 to get my test data, and as you can tell from the above
picture, the sun gods looked on us fondly to provide those 3 days!

![](/assets/images/pearce_blog_post/image11.jpeg)

Once we had hauled all the equipment onto
the glacier, it was time to start surveying. It begins by a lot of
walking, laying down seismic cables, and burying in geophones. Once this
is done, you can connect to the computer, where you inevitably see that
you’ve connected a cable back to front, or the wrong way round. After
this troubleshooting, I would take my seat by the computer as ‘data
checker’ and Adam Booth, my PhD supervisor, who nobly ‘volunteered’ as
my seismic source, would begin to hammer.

2 days later, over 1000 hammer hits, a few of very bruised ribs (on
Adams part), and many a paracetamol (Again.. on Adams part), my data was
collected! All that was left to do was, collect in the equipment and
head back to base leaving the ice cap like we had never even been there.
Plus or minus one small hole in the edge of the ice cap where we had to
dig a bit of a stuck skidoo out!

We celebrated the traditional Norwegian way, with Aquavit and Gamalost
(traditional, fermented,Norwegian cheese) gifted to us by Kjell Magne,
our field guide on the ice cap. You might be able to tell from our
tentative expressions, it is definitely an acquired taste! 

![](/assets/images/pearce_blog_post/image13.jpeg)

**Season 2, 2019: **

![](/assets/images/pearce_blog_post/image15.jpeg)

We were heading back to Hardanger in April
2019, only this year with more equipment (we were going to drill a
borehole on the top of the glacier!), more data aims, more time, and
more people! We had aimed for the same time of year as it had worked
well for us the year before. We packed up the equipment, snuck it onto
the train in Bergen (well.. this year we had to pay for 'bike storage')
and headed to Finse. It was at this point we started to worry a little
as we looked out the train window, we were seeing a lot of green and a
lot of water, but fortunately no trolls.

![](/assets/images/pearce_blog_post/image17.jpeg)

With the warm weather at the front of our
minds, the lake which we had to cross to get to the glacier was melting
more and more each day, and the warm weather meaning our route to the
ice cap was becoming more rocky and grassy rather than snow, time was of
the essence. To add to this, there was a fuel shortage on station as the
early arrival of spring had prevented more fuel being transported to the
research station, meaning every trip in the skidoo needed to be as
efficient as possible. We sat down, and on the big blackboard in the
research station, planned out the bare minimum that all three teams at
the station would need in order to get the data they were after.

It seemed that this year, although the sun gods were VERY much on our
side (quite possibly too much), the skidoo gods were not.

That afternoon we headed out to the bottom of the ice cap to drop off
equipment. It was at this point we learnt that the soft slushy snow
meant the amount of weight we could have in the sledges was greatly
reduced. After getting stuck in a slushy/icey mix, we realised we were
going to have to shuttle equipment and people back and forth in a
logistical dance. Ensuring we didn’t waste fuel, didn’t break through
the lake ice, and thanks to the appearance of the rocks, having to take
a new route to get to the foot of the glacier each time we headed out.

Even though we were at the station for almost 3 weeks this time, I only
needed a minimum of two sunny (but cold) days to get the data I needed
from the ice cap, and whilst keeping an eye on the weather every day,
waiting for the cold, (yet sunny) spell to hit, on day 7, they arrived.

![](/assets/images/pearce_blog_post/image19.jpeg)

With the sledge packed as light as
possible, and some ferrying of equipment and people done (and only one
very stuck skidoo hiccup later), using the GPS coordinates from the
previous year, we got back to my field site. At this point, we hit the
ground running, and got to surveying. The plan for day one on the ice
cap was to shoot a seismic line in the same position as the previous
year, but with the geophones closer together, and a larger coverage of
data. With the help from the other team members, setting up the seismic
line was quick going, and the acquisition went smoothly, once again with
Adam at the seismic source, (fortunately less hammer shots than the year
before), and myself on the laptop.

At the same time, we had the other team members sorting out the
borehole. It sounded as though this was all going well, until a loud
‘CRAP’ spilled out across the top of the otherwise quiet ice cap. It
quickly surfaced that the sound had been Bryn Hubbard, as we looked
across to him with a broken drill in hand and a borehole stuck 2m deep
in the snow. This didn’t mean the end for the borehole, only that we had
to adjust our aims for the depth as we would be hand drilling the hole,
and that we had to do a little bit of digging to recover the end of the
borehole. Although time-consuming, digging out the borehole meant we had
a snow pit in the firn, allowing us to get a close up look at the
density variations in the top 2m of the site, (we were also able to use
the blocks of snow dug out to make a really great igloo, but that’s
beyond the point!)

![](/assets/images/pearce_blog_post/image21.jpeg)

With our original aim of 30m deep scaled
back to 10m, we spent the rest of the day taking shifts at hand drilling
into the ice, we reached a depth of 11m, and called it a success! With a
few bits of glacier ice collected to take home to have in some gin and
tonics, we were all very happy with what we had achieved that day, (I
can promise you, gin and tonic tastes even better when accompanied by
ice cubes you drilled yourself). With a bit more resilience than we
previously had, some successful data acquisition, and the optimism of
another sunny but cold day, we were all excited for the following day.

With our good data day behind us, the next day was a quicker start, with
all the equipment already on the ice cap we just had to get up there and
shoot the downhole seismic. The weather wasn’t as nice as we’d
anticipated, but as it had stayed cold, it was safe to get to the ice
cap. Once there, it was just a case of laying out our geophones around
the borehole and using our downhole seismic source to acquire the data.
Remarkably, for the first time in two field seasons, everything, went
smoothly and to plan! With spirits high, and a few more bits of ice
collected, we headed off the ice cap in a few ferried shifts, taking the
equipment back to base, and took a deep sigh of relief. Two years of
planning for data acquisition had all come together! The rest of the
week saw the warm weather return, meaning the route to the glacier
became near on impossible to traverse, unless the skidoo had suddenly
grown wheels to get over all the newly appearing boulders. Meaning we
were limited with what we could do, but sledging on station was always
an option.

It's clear to see from two fieldwork trips to Norway, that even with the
best intentions of planning, things don't often go the way you expect!
None the less, I had two fantastic field seasons, with great company,
amazing food, and a few awesome datasets collected!

I want to say the biggest thank you to everyone who has helped over my
two field seasons, most notably Adam Booth for being the power behind
the seismic sledgehammer. A big thank you also to Siobhan and James
Killingbeck, Hannah Watts, Benedict Reinardy for their help with
acquiring the seismic line. Bryn Hubbard and Katie Miles, for their help
with drilling the borehole. And Kjell Magner for his logistical help on
the icecap, meaning we didn't end up in a crevasse. And of course, the
biggest thank you to Marits, for all the amazing food she cooked to keep
us sustained each day! And finally, thank you to the INTERACT team for
funding this fieldwork.  

![](/assets/images/pearce_blog_post/image23.jpeg)

<a rel="license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/4.0/"><img alt="Creative Commons License" style="border-width:0" src="https://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nd/4.0/88x31.png" /></a><br />This work is licensed under a <a rel="license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/4.0/">Creative Commons Attribution-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License</a>.
